---
title: "Dictionaries"
author: Jed Rembold
date: November 10, 2021
slideNumber: true
theme: "python_monokai"
highlightjs-theme: monokai
width: 1920
height: 1200
transition: slide
hash: true
history: false

---


## Announcements
- If you haven't yet, you absolutely should get a start on Enigma today
    - That would leave about one milestone per day, which is very doable, even accounting for the fact that some will take more time than others.
- Section questions today and tomorrow will focus on common sticking points that people have with the Enigma Project
- Polling: [rembold-class.ddns.net](http://rembold-class.ddns.net)

## Review Question {data-notes="Solution: hnktge"}
::::::cols
::::col
Let's consider a greatly simplified Enigma machine, which only has one rotor that is not turning. So the signal goes through the rotor then the reflector and back through the rotor. Given the rotor and reflector mappings shown to the right, what would the word `python` encrypt to?

:::{.poll}
#. `aicmnz`
#. `hnktge`
#. `rfqbls`
#. `zghpmy`
:::

::::

::::col
\begin{tikzpicture}%%height=100%
[label/.style={font=\Large\bf, MGreen},
scale=1.8,
transform shape,
]
\node[label, MRed] at (1,0.5) {Rotor 1};
\foreach[count=\t] \a/\b in {A/D,B/M,C/T,D/W,E/S,F/I,G/L,H/R,I/U,J/Y,K/Q,L/N,M/K,N/F,O/E,P/J,Q/C,R/A,S/Z,T/B,U/P,V/G,W/X,X/O,Y/H,Z/V} {
	\node[label](a) at (0,-\t*0.5) {\a};
	\node[label](b) at (2,-\t*0.5) {\b};
	\draw[-stealth, MBlue, line width=3pt] (a) -- (b);
}


\node[label, MRed] at (6,0.5) {Reflector};
\foreach[count=\t] \a/\b in {A/U,B/Q,C/N,D/T,E/L,F/S,G/Z,H/F,I/M,J/R,K/E,L/H,M/D,N/P,O/X,P/K,Q/I,R/B,S/V,T/Y,U/G,V/J,W/C,X/W,Y/O,Z/A} {
	\node[label](a) at (5,-\t*0.5) {\a};
	\node[label](b) at (7,-\t*0.5) {\b};
	\draw[-stealth, MBlue, line width=3pt] (a) -- (b);
}

\end{tikzpicture}


::::
::::::

<!--
## Review Question
::::::cols
::::col
```{.python style='max-height:900px'}
class MyClass:
	varA = 3
	varB = True

	def __init__(self):
		self.v = MyClass.varA
		if MyClass.varB:
			self.v += 1

A = MyClass()
B = MyClass()
MyClass.varB = False
C = MyClass()
print(MyClass.varA)
```
::::

::::col
Suppose the code to the left was written and executed. What would be the output of the printed statement?

:::{.poll}
#. 3
#. 5
#. 6
#. None of the above
:::

::::
::::::
-->

## Maps and Dictionaries
- A common form of information associates pairs of data values
	- Commonly called a _map_ in computer science
	- Python calls such a structure a _dictionary_
- A dictionary associates two different values:
	- A simple value called the _key_, which is often a string but doesn't need to be
	- A larger and more complex object called the _value_
- This idea of associating pairs of values is exhibited all over in the real world
	- Actual dictionaries! The words are the keys, the definitions the values.
	- Web addresses! Keys are the urls, the values are the webpage contents.


## Pythonic Dictionaries
- Similar in syntax to lists:
	- Fundamental operation is selection, which we indicate with square brackets: `[]`
	- Differences:
		- Created with squiggly brackets: `{}`
		- Index values are the keys, which can be any immutable data type
- When creating a dictionary from scratch, the key and value pairings are separated by a colon `:`
```python
empty_dict = {}
normal_dict = {'Bob': 21, 'Nancy': 32}
```

## Dictionary Selections
- We still select an element with square brackets, but provide the key of the desired value instead of a numeric index
```{.python-repl}
>>> A = normal_dict['Bob']
>>> print(A)
21
```
- Dictionary selections are assignable! That is, dictionaries are mutable.
```{.python-repl}
>>> normal_dict['Bob'] = 33
>>> print(normal_dict['Bob'])
33
```
- Note that keys must be unique! Or else it would be unclear what element should be selected.


## Grade Sheet Example
- Suppose we had a file of student ids and accompanying scores that we wanted to read into a dictionary and then access.
```{.python style='max-height:700px; font-size:.8em; line-heigh:2em;'}
def read_to_dict(filename):
    dictionary = {}
    with open(filename) as f:
        for line in f:
            ID, score = line.strip().split(',')
            dictionary[ID] = score
    return dictionary

def get_student_score():
    scores = read_to_dict('SampleGrades.txt')
    done = False
    while not done:
        student_id = input('Enter a student id number: ')
        if student_id == "":
            done = True
        else:
            if student_id in scores:
                print(f"Student got a {scores[student_id]}.")
            else:
                print(f"Student id {student_id} was not found in classlist")
```

## Iterating through a Dictionary
- Frequently we might want to iterate through a dictionary, checking either its values or its keys
- Python supports iteration with the `for` statement, which has the form of:
```python
for key in dictionary:
	value = dictionary[key]
	# Then code to work with that key and value
```
- You can also use the `.items` method to grab both key and values together:
```python
for key, value in dictionary.items():
	# Then code to work with that key and value
```

## Finding Students by grade
```{.python style='max-height:900px'}
def get_students_with_score():
    scores = read_to_dict('SampleGrades.txt')
    done = False
    while not done:
        des_grade = input('Enter a letter grade: ')
        if des_grade == "":
            done = True
        else:
            for st_id, grade in scores.items():
                if grade == des_grade.strip().upper():
                    print(f"{st_id} got a {grade}")
```


## Common Dictionary Methods

Method call | Description
---|-----
`len(dict)` | Returns the number of key-value pairs in the dictionary
`dict.get(key, value)` | Returns the value associated with the `key` in the dictionary. If the key is not found, returns the specified value, which is `None` by default)
`dict.pop(key)` | Removes the key-value pair corresponding to `key` and returns the associated value. Will raise an error if the key is not found.
`dict.clear()` | Removes all key-value pairs from the dictionary, leaving it empty.
`dict.items()` | Returns an iterable object that cycles through the successive tuples consisting of a key-value pair.


## Losing the Keys
- Dictionaries are unordered, all the lookup information comes from the key
- When you ask for an value corresponding to a certain key, the computer needs to search the dictionary for a matching key
- There are several possible approaches to doing this, which we'll talk a bit more about later in the semester
	- Most strategies take longer the larger the dictionary is (which probably makes sense)
	- One strategy though, called _hashing_, implements a function on the space of possible keys, which ends up telling the implementation exactly where to look for the matching item. The result being that this strategy does _not_ take more time for a larger dictionary!

<!--
- Possible implementations:
	- _Linear search_: This implementation keeps track of the name-value pairs in an array, and just loops through the array to find or place new keys in $\mathcal{O}(N)$ time
	- _Binary search_: This implementation keeps track of the name-value pairs in an array but keeps them sorted by some method. Then uses binary search to find or place new keys in $\mathcal{O}{\log N}$ time
-->


## Hashing
- Can seem surprising or magical that we could have a method that takes a constant amount of time to look up a value independent of the length of the map or dictionary!
- Envision finding a word in a dictionary
	- Most have markings along the edge where each section of letters starts, so you know where to start looking
- The most common map and dictionary implementations use a strategy called _hashing_, which is conceptually similar to using the section markings on a dictionary.
	- Critical idea is that can you massively improve performance if you use the key itself to help you figure out where to look

## Hash Codes, not Browns
- Hash codes must follow a set of guidelines (or a code of conduct):
	#. The hash code must be relatively easy to compute
	#. The hash code for a particular object must always be the same for a given Python session
	#. If two objects are identical, they must have the same hash code
	#. The hash codes must be distributed as randomly/evenly as possible over the space of possible keys
- Python has a built-in function called `hash` that takes an object and returns an integer, which is called the _hash code_ for that object
- Maps using the hashing algorithm use the hash code for a key as a starting point to help find the associated value.


## Bucket Hashing
- One common strategy is to choose a certain number of _buckets_ to make up an array, where each object's hash will place it into a particular bucket
	- Would mean that, having checked a key's hash, you'd know which bucket to look in!
- In practice, the number of buckets is smaller than the number of hash codes, so you need a way to decide on what hash code corresponds to which bucket.
	- Typically done with a remainder operation along the lines of
	```python
	bucket = abs(hash(key)) % num_buckets
	```
- Some buckets will still end up with multiple key-value pairs. These are called _collisions_ and lower the efficiency of the algorithm.
- Since hash codes are spread around equally, each bucket in theory would end up with similar numbers of key-value pairs


## Bucket Hashing Example 
```{.python style='max-height:900px; font-size:0.8em;'}
class Dictionary:
    NBUCKETS = 10

    def __init__(self):
        self.buckets = [ [] for _ in range(Dictionary.NBUCKETS)]

    def get(self, key):
        H = hash(key)
        bucket_id = abs(H) % Dictionary.NBUCKETS
        for pair in self.buckets[bucket_id]:
            if pair[0] == key:
                return pair[1]
        return None

    def put(self, key, value):
        H = hash(key)
        bucket_id = abs(H) % Dictionary.NBUCKETS
        bucket = self.buckets[bucket_id]
        for i in range(len(bucket)):
			bkey, bvalue = bucket[i]
            if bkey == key:
                bucket[i] = (key, value)
                return
        bucket.append((key,value))

    def __repr__(self):
        return repr(self.buckets)
```
